Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for Digital
Public Infrastructure: A Cybernetic Framework

Anivar A Aravind∗1
1

Independent Researcher

January 2026

Abstract
Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) operates at the scale of populations. Systems governing
identity, payment, and data exchange effectively constitute a new administrative state. While
international definitions from the G20 and United Nations articulate policy goals (that systems
should be open, inclusive, and safe), they lack the structural requirements to verify these attributes.
This paper proposes a formal evaluation framework based on corrigibility: the structural capacity
of those affected by a system to detect error, signal harm, and trigger correction. We synthesize
necessary conditions from three traditions: cybernetics (Ashby’s Law of Requisite Variety), commons
governance (Ostrom’s design principles), and free software (Stallman’s four freedoms). The resulting
framework identifies five non-negotiable properties: Reversibility, Inspectability, Verification,
Constraint, and Reproduction. We demonstrate that a failure in any single dimension breaks
the feedback loop required for system stability. Furthermore, we extend this framework to learned
systems (AI) and establish evidentiary standards for distinguishing authentic governance from
performative compliance. The framework is released under CC0 public domain.

1

Introduction

Digital Public Infrastructure is not merely a collection of software stacks; it is the encoding of political arrangements
into technical artifacts [Winner, 1980]. Access to essential survival services (food distribution, banking, healthcare,
mobility) is increasingly mediated through these systems. Because these systems apply fixed rules to the infinite
variety of human life, they will inevitably misclassify, exclude, or fail specific users. This is not a malfunction; it is a
mathematical certainty when finite rule sets encounter human diversity.
The critical question for a digital society is not whether errors occur, but whether the architecture permits those
affected to detect, correct, and reverse them before harm becomes permanent.
Current policy discourse defines DPI through aspirational language. The G20 New Delhi Declaration (2023) and the
UN/UNDP framework [UNDP, 2024] describe systems that “should be secure” or “can be built on open standards.”
These definitions exclude almost nothing. They describe intent, not requirements. Under such broad definitions, a
system that traps users in a coercive loop can be labeled “public infrastructure” simply because it operates at scale.
This paper defines corrigibility not as a moral preference, but as a structural property essential for stability. We argue
that unverifiable constraint is structurally indistinguishable from absolute operator control. Therefore, public legitimacy requires more than policy assertions; it requires a cryptographic chain of custody (signed, timestamped
evidence linking claims to verifiable artifacts) and a verifiable capacity for correction.

∗

Corresponding author: anivar.net · ping@anivar.net · ORCID: 0009-0009-8995-0005

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

2

Aravind

The Problem: Definitions Without Structure

The accepted definitions of Digital Public Infrastructure share a common defect: they describe desired outcomes
without specifying the structural requirements needed to achieve them. The standard formulation (that DPI is a set of
“shared digital systems” built on “open standards” [G20, 2023]) leaves open four distinct failure modes.
First, Open Standards are not Open Execution. A proprietary system can speak a standard language (like a
browser displaying HTML) while remaining entirely opaque in its internal logic. The interface is public; the machine
is private.
Second, Legal Frameworks do not guarantee Technical Rights. A system that requires a court order to correct a
database error effectively denies correction to the majority of its users. Legal remedy operates on bureaucratic time;
infrastructure operates on digital time.
Third, Aspiration is not Compliance. Definitions that rely on what a system “can” do or “should” be offer no
resistance to authoritarian drift. Modal language creates no enforceable constraint.
Fourth, Scale is not Accountability. A system that serves a billion users achieves universality, but universal
deployment does not confer public legitimacy. Population-scale operation may simply mean population-scale capture.
The “public” in such definitions refers to the number of subjects, not the structure of control.
Without hard structural requirements, “Public” becomes a mere descriptor of scale rather than a mode of accountability. Just as classification systems become invisible as they gain acceptance [Bowker and Star, 1999], incorrigible
infrastructure recedes into the background, becoming unchallengeable precisely as it becomes essential. This danger
is acute in the transition to AI-mediated governance, where “Infrastructure” begins to make probabilistic judgments
rather than deterministic records.

3

Theoretical Foundations

This framework does not invent new ethical categories. Instead, it derives a single structural requirement from three
independent intellectual traditions. Whether viewed through physics, political economy, or code, the stability of a
system depends on the capacity of its subjects to provide corrective feedback.
3.1

Cybernetics and Requisite Variety

In cybernetics, the relationship between a controller and its environment is governed by Ashby’s Law of Requisite
Variety [Ashby, 1956]. The law states that for a system to be stable, the number of control states must meet or exceed
the number of environmental states:
𝑉 (controller) ≥ 𝑉 (disturbance)

(1)

In DPI, the “disturbance” is the boundless diversity of the human population. No pre-programmed rule set can match
this variety. Stability, therefore, relies on feedback channels that transmit error signals from the population back into
the system’s behavior. If these channels (specifically the ability to exit or correct) are blocked, the controller’s variety
effectively collapses. The system loses the capacity to regulate its own impact, leading inevitably to instability or
oppression.
3.2

The Commons and Constitutional Constraint

Elinor Ostrom’s work on commons governance [Ostrom, 1990] establishes that sustainable systems require monitors
who are accountable to the users and collective-choice arrangements that allow users to modify the rules. A system
in which rule-making is the exclusive preserve of the operator acts as a walled garden, not a commons.
Critically, Ostrom identifies that governance is not merely about access; it is about graduated sanctions and low-cost
conflict resolution. Applied to digital infrastructure, this implies that users must possess binding authority: the
ability to set enforceable limits on the system’s behavior. If a system’s constraints are merely advisory or can be
overridden by the operator at will, the system is fundamentally ungoverned.
3.3

Free Software and the Right to Reproduce

The Free Software movement [Stallman, 2002] contributes the mechanical means of enforcement. Stallman’s “Four
Freedoms” are often misread as a philosophy of sharing, but they are functionally a philosophy of power. The freedom
2

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

to study (Inspectability) ensures power is visible; the freedoms to modify and distribute (Reproduction) ensure that
power is not a monopoly.
This tradition clarifies that openness is not a passive property (reading code) but an active one (forking infrastructure).
Transparency without the power to act on it is passive observation. The ability to reproduce the system independent
of its original steward is the only ultimate check against operator capture.

4

The Structural Conditions of Corrigibility

We define corrigibility as the existence of specific mechanical capabilities that allow the subjects of a system to
maintain control over it. Digital Public Infrastructure cannot rely on intent or policy to guarantee this property; it
requires a specific architecture.
These capabilities form a hierarchy of defense. If a system lacks any single capability, the feedback loop breaks. Such
a system becomes structurally indistinguishable from a monopoly exercising absolute control.
4.1

Test 1: EXIT (Reversibility of Participation)

The foundational condition of any corrigible system is the Reversibility of Participation [Hirschman, 1970].
Irrevocable consent functions structurally as forced enrollment. For an infrastructure to operate as a public utility rather
than a coercive instrument, users must possess the capacity to withdraw from it without incurring disproportionate
penalty or material exclusion.
In practice, many systems operate as a ratchet. They are easy to enter but practical dependencies make them
impossible to leave. Aadhaar exemplifies this failure: opting out results in exclusion from banking, food rations, and
mobile connectivity. When a system becomes a prerequisite for existence, refusal acts as self-exclusion rather than
feedback. UPI partially mitigates this because cash remains legal tender, but network effects increasingly marginalize
non-participants. Linux, by contrast, imposes no survival penalty: a user can migrate to BSD or Windows without
losing access to essential services.
From a cybernetic perspective, EXIT constitutes the primary negative feedback loop. Blocking this channel silences the
user’s error signal. This blockade overloads the political layer with demands that the technical layer has suppressed.
This dynamic was formalized by Hirschman [Hirschman, 1970] in his analysis of organizational decline. Hirschman
distinguished two correction mechanisms: exit (withdrawal from participation) and voice (attempts to change the
system from within). His central finding is that these mechanisms exist in productive tension, not as substitutes.
Exit, in Hirschman’s formulation, is “neat,” “impersonal,” and “indirect”: one either exits or one does not. This binary
quality makes exit a high-bandwidth error signal. When users leave, the system receives unambiguous information
that something has failed. Voice, by contrast, is costly and conditioned on the influence and bargaining power that
participants can bring to bear. Voice is gradual, political, and requires sustained effort.
Critically, Hirschman demonstrated that exit without voice produces abandonment rather than correction. Qualityconscious users flee rather than fight. But voice without exit produces capture. Complaints become cosmetic (see
Section 5.2.1) because the system faces no credible threat of user departure. The effectiveness of voice depends on the
credibility of exit.
This framework illuminates why Aadhaar’s mandatory enrollment is structurally pathological. By eliminating exit,
the system does not merely suppress one feedback channel. It degrades voice itself. When citizens cannot leave,
their complaints lack credibility. The operator can absorb infinite grievance without modifying system behavior
(𝜕𝑆/𝜕𝐺 = 0). Hirschman’s insight formalizes what cybernetics predicts: blocking the error signal does not eliminate
the error; it eliminates the system’s capacity to respond.
4.2

Test 2: CODE (Inspectability of Logic)

Users who cannot leave a system must possess the ability to inspect it. Inspectability of Logic requires that the rules
determining outcomes are visible to those they govern. Power in a digital system resides in execution. Lessig [Lessig,
2006] established that software architecture functions as regulation: code “determines what people can or cannot do
in the first place,” unlike legal regulation which sets rules for behavior and retroactively punishes non-compliance.
This is regulation without appeal. If the execution path remains hidden, that power is absolute. It is not merely
unaccountable but structurally unobservable to those it governs.
3

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

Transparency specifications or open standards are insufficient if the executing artifact remains a black box. Aadhaar’s
CIDR (Central Identities Data Repository) is proprietary: the matching algorithm that determines identity cannot be
examined. UPI publishes API specifications, but the NPCI switching logic remains closed. Let’s Encrypt demonstrates
the alternative: its CA software is fully open source, allowing anyone to audit the certificate issuance logic that secures
web traffic. For learned systems, the challenge intensifies. Llama publishes inference weights but withholds training
data composition and RLHF preferences. This is spec-as-source: you can run the model but cannot understand why it
produces specific outputs.
4.3

Test 3: AUDIT (Independent Verification)

While inspection enables understanding, Independent Verification enables truth. This functions as the sensor
in the cybernetic feedback loop. A system is verifiable only if external, permissionless actors can test its behavior,
measure its error rates, and document its failure modes within production environments.
Incorrigible systems typically capture this function. UPI permits RBI regulatory audits, but transaction-level verification requires NPCI authorization; independent researchers cannot measure failure rates or dispute resolution times.
Open-weights AI models (Llama, Qwen, DeepSeek) selectively publish red-teaming results while blocking independent adversarial testing at scale. Bitcoin provides the counter-model: every transaction is independently verifiable
by any node, and consensus is cryptographic proof. Similarly, Let’s Encrypt publishes Certificate Transparency logs,
making every issued certificate publicly auditable in real time.
The structural function of opacity is sensor failure. A system whose error rates cannot be independently measured
cannot be regulated. The controller receives no signal about divergence from intended behavior. Under Ashby’s Law,
such a system will drift until external forces impose correction. Those forces, operating outside the technical loop,
will impose correction through channels the system cannot anticipate or absorb. Pasquale [Pasquale, 2015] describes
this as a “one-way mirror” relationship, but the cybernetic translation is precise: asymmetric observability breaks the
feedback loop at the sensing stage.
4.4

Test 4: GOVERN (Constitutive Constraint)

Verification identifies the error, while Constitutive Constraint enforces the correction. This framework distinguishes
structural governance from administrative functions like consultation, multi-stakeholder meetings, or feedback forms.
Governance exists only when binding constraints limit system behavior in ways the operator cannot override.
Aadhaar is governed by UIDAI fiat: the same entity that operates the system sets its rules. UPI has NPCI governance,
but NPCI is majority-owned by participating banks, creating structural conflicts. Let’s Encrypt shows what binding
constraint looks like: the ISRG charter legally binds the organization to its 501(c)(3) public benefit mission, with an
appointed board accountable to that charter. Bitcoin’s BIP process demonstrates governance through proven fork
history; contentious changes have been rejected by the network, proving the community can override developer
intent. PostgreSQL’s contributor agreement prevents any single entity from capturing the project.
4.4.1

The Post-Execution Fallacy

A critical failure in modern policy involves relying on external or after-the-fact remedies to substitute for structural
constraints. Mechanisms such as courts, ombudsmen, and grievance redressal officers operate on “bureaucratic
time,” measured in months or years. Infrastructure operates on “digital time,” measured in milliseconds. A system
that executes a harmful action, such as wrongful deletion of a beneficiary, and relies on a court order to reverse it
six months later is structurally ungoverned for that duration. True governance must function within the system’s
execution loop to block prohibited states before they manifest.
Consequently, claims of governance must be provable rather than declared. They require a signed cryptographic
chain of custody linking the operator’s authority to an external, non-overrideable instrument.
4.5

Test 5: FORK (Independent Reproduction)

The ultimate check on power is the ability to recreate it. Independent Reproduction determines whether the
ecosystem allows the infrastructure itself to be separated from its current steward. This requirement distinguishes
structural resilience from simple market competition.
The existence of competitors, such as choosing between two proprietary cloud providers, provides an “Exit” option
but not a “Fork.” Shifting providers allows a user to escape a specific operator, but it forces them to abandon their
history, identity, and operational logic. This action is substitution, not reproduction.
4

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

A system passes the FORK test only if the community possesses the legal rights, technical artifacts, and economic
means to spawn a functionally equivalent instance. Aadhaar fails completely: no entity outside UIDAI can reproduce
the identity infrastructure. OpenSearch demonstrates what successful forking looks like. When Elastic changed
its license, AWS forked Elasticsearch and the community continued development independently. Linux has been
forked thousands of times (Android, Chrome OS, countless distributions). Llama presents partial forkability: anyone
can run the weights, but reproducing the training requires resources only a handful of companies possess. If Meta
abandoned Llama tomorrow, the community could not recreate it.

4.6

System

EXIT

FORK

Structural Reality

Cloudflare
AWS
Aadhaar
Linux
Llama

PASS (Market)
FAIL
Can switch to Fastly (Exit), cannot reproduce (Proprietary)
PASS (Market)
FAIL
Can migrate to Azure, logic/state locked (Ecosystem capture)
FAIL (Mandatory) FAIL
Cannot refuse (Legal), cannot reproduce (Total capture)
PASS
PASS
Can leave, can reproduce/fork (Corrigible infrastructure)
PASS
PARTIAL Can refuse, can run weights, cannot reproduce training
Table 1: Differentiation between Exit (Substitution) and Fork (Reproduction)

The Topology of Necessity

Five tests describe the anatomy of a stable control loop rather than a random assortment of desired properties (see
Figure 1).
• EXIT provides the Error Signal.
• AUDIT acts as the Sensor.
• CODE ensures Transmission Clarity.
• GOVERN serves as the Actuator.
• FORK provides Selection Pressure over the entire loop.
Failure in any single dimension breaks the control loop at a specific physical point. The result is not partial infrastructure but Open Loop Control. An open-loop system executes directives without the capacity to sense deviation,
interpret error, or apply corrective force.
Under conditions of human variety and environmental change, open-loop control is structurally unstable. Error
accumulates without bound. Misalignment compounds. The system drifts toward failure.
Corrigibility is the structural precondition that closes the loop. Only when all five tests are satisfied does a system
possess a complete feedback topology capable of detecting divergence, transmitting intelligible signals, executing
correction, and replacing failed control logic when necessary. Without this closure, stability is mathematically and
operationally impossible.
5

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

Figure 1: Topology of Necessity. Each corrigibility test corresponds to a breakage point in the feedback control loop.

Cybernetics

Commons

CODE

EXIT

AUDIT

Free Software

GOVERN

FORK

All five tests required. Failure of any one disqualifies.

Figure 2: Five corrigibility tests derived from three independent theoretical traditions.
4.7

Structural Symmetry of Power

The five tests form a single power invariant, expressed across layers of control:
Layer

Test

Function (Cybernetic)

Individual
Logic
Logic
System
Ecosystem

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

Reversibility of participation
Inspectability of rules
Verifiability of error
Constraint on controller variance
Selection pressure via reproduction

Each test enforces the same principle: No actor exercising power may be the sole judge of its continuation, scope, or
correction.
A system without EXIT is coercive. A system without GOVERN is arbitrary. A system without FORK is captive.
4.8

Layer-Decomposed Evaluation

Complex infrastructure frequently stratifies into distinct functional layers, each with independent governance,
transparency, and reproducibility properties. The five tests must be applied to each layer separately when:
1. Different entities control different layers (protocol versus implementation versus trust framework)
6

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

2. Transparency varies across layers (open protocol, closed switching logic)
3. Forkability differs by layer (code is forkable, network effects are not)
4.8.1

Propagation Rule

A system that passes a test at one layer but fails at another does not achieve “partial” compliance. It fails the test. The
evaluation proceeds from the layer closest to user impact upward; failure at any layer propagates to the whole.
Formally: Let 𝐿1 , 𝐿2 , … , 𝐿𝑛 be the layers of a system, ordered by proximity to user impact. For test 𝑇 :
𝑛

𝑇system = ⋀ 𝑇 (𝐿𝑖 )

(2)

𝑖=1

The system passes 𝑇 if and only if every layer passes 𝑇 .
4.8.2

Application to Identity Infrastructure
Layer

Example Components

Typical Failure Mode

Protocol
Implementation
Credential
Trust

W3C DID, VC Data Model
Specific resolver, wallet software
Issuer policies, attribute schemas
Relying party acceptance, trusted lists

Often passes CODE
May fail CODE (proprietary)
Often fails GOVERN (unilateral issuer)
Often fails FORK (cannot reproduce acceptance)

Table 2: Identity infrastructure layer decomposition

The UPI payment rail exhibits similar layering: the protocol specification (NPCI-published) passes CODE at the protocol
layer, but the switching logic (NPCI-operated) fails CODE at the implementation layer. Since the implementation
layer is closer to user impact, the system fails CODE.
4.8.3

The Weakest-Layer Principle

This propagation rule has a counterintuitive but structurally necessary consequence: a system’s corrigibility status
equals its weakest layer across any test dimension. Strength at one layer cannot compensate for failure at another.
This principle prevents a common evasion: claiming corrigibility by publishing peripheral artifacts while retaining
control over the layers that determine outcomes. Open-washing (Section 7.4) typically exploits layer confusion.
Releasing SDKs (passing CODE at the interface layer) while keeping core logic proprietary (failing CODE at the
execution layer) does not produce partial corrigibility. It produces total failure at the execution layer, which propagates
to the system determination.

5

The Dynamics of Incorrigibility

The five tests define the static architecture of a corrigible system. However, infrastructure exists in time. When we
apply these structural requirements to dynamic systems, three fundamental implications emerge regarding stability,
energy conservation, and the rule of law. These principles explain why centralized grievance redressal mechanisms
(the standard bureaucratic answer to error) are mathematically insufficient to guarantee stability.
5.1

The Correction Velocity Inequality

Stability in a cybernetic system is not merely a function of whether a correction path exists, but of its latency relative to
error generation. A correction mechanism that is theoretically available (e.g., a court case or a legislative amendment)
but slower than the rate of divergence creates a runaway failure state.
We posit the Temporal Stability Condition: A system is corrigible only if the rate of effective correction (𝐶) exceeds
the rate of error accumulation (𝐸) caused by environmental variety.
𝑑
𝑑
𝐶(𝑡) > 𝐸(𝑡)
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑡
7

(3)

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

𝐸(𝑡) is driven by environmental volatility: identity fraud tactics, software exploits, pandemics, or economic shocks.
These phenomena tend to grow exponentially or appear in high-velocity impulse shocks. In contrast, centralized
governance operates on bureaucratic time. Legislative changes and judicial reviews are measured in months or
years, while technical errors accumulate on digital time, measured in milliseconds.
𝑑𝐸digital
𝑑𝐶bureaucratic
≪
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑡

(4)

This timescale mismatch is an instance of the Collingridge Dilemma [Collingridge, 1980]: a double-bind in technology
governance. Early in a technology’s development, change is easy but the need for change cannot be foreseen (the
information problem). Later, when impacts become clear, change has become expensive, difficult, and time-consuming
because the technology is entrenched (the power problem).
Digital Public Infrastructure exhibits the Collingridge Dilemma in acute form. By the time Aadhaar’s exclusion effects
became documented (starvation deaths, banking denials, welfare failures), the system had achieved mandatory status.
Correction now requires not merely technical modification but legal amendment, bureaucratic reorganization, and
political will. The system’s success in achieving scale has made it resistant to correction.
Corrigibility is the structural response to this dilemma: build the correction mechanisms before the need for correction
is apparent. EXIT, CODE, AUDIT, GOVERN, and FORK are not remedies applied after failure; they are architectural
features that must be present from deployment. A system without these features will eventually require correction
but will lack the capacity to receive it.
This inequality explains the failure of the “post-execution” remedies discussed in Section 4.4. Mechanisms like
ombudsmen or grievance redressal officers inherently operate at a lower bandwidth and higher latency than the
systems they supervise. When the correction loop is structurally too slow to manage the complexity of the environment,
error accumulates in the system until it suffers catastrophic collapse. Corrigibility requires closing the gap between
error generation and correction; this is only possible if correction logic operates within the technical loop (Test 4),
not outside it.
Appendix B provides a formal control-theoretic treatment of these claims; no additional assumptions beyond those
stated here are introduced.
5.2

The Conservation of Correction Demand

When a system fails to correct errors due to the velocity mismatch described above, the demand for correction does
not evaporate. It transforms. We propose a principle of Conservation of Correction Demand: for a given system
state, the total pressure for correction is constant.
𝐹designed + 𝐹emergent = 𝐾

(5)

Here, 𝐹designed represents the flow of correction through designed channels, principally EXIT (reducing participation)
and GOVERN (altering rules). When these channels are structurally blocked or throttled by bureaucracy, the
pressure shifts to 𝐹emergent . Emergent correction channels take the form of protest, litigation, hacks, grey markets, and
eventually, civil unrest.
System operators can choose where correction occurs; they cannot choose whether it occurs. By suppressing EXIT
(via mandatory laws) and blocking GOVERN (via executive fiat), authorities force correction demand into channels
that are slower, costlier, and fundamentally more destabilizing to the social order. Corrigibility acts as a pressure
relief valve that converts potential volatility into system evolution.
5.2.1

Grievance Is Not Feedback

A critical distinction must be drawn between grievance and governance. Many incorrigible systems act as “roach
motels” for complaints: they allow users to submit unlimited feedback (𝐺), but the system state (𝑆) remains invariant
to that input.
𝜕𝑆
=0
𝜕𝐺

(6)

Grievance channels that record dissatisfaction without a binding mechanism to modify execution, policy, or eligibility
logic do not constitute a feedback loop. They serve a cosmetic function, mimicking responsiveness while preserving
8

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

the controller’s rigidity. Under Ashby’s Law, if the controller’s response variety does not increase in response to
signal, regulation has failed.
5.3

The Structural Preconditions of Law

These dynamics have profound implications for constitutional review. Legal doctrines such as proportionality analysis
presuppose that state intrusions can be measured, minimized, and remedied. However, modern digital systems
frequently violate the structural assumptions upon which these legal doctrines rest.
A court cannot apply proportionality review to a system whose execution is opaque (CODE). A legislature cannot
remedy harm if the mechanism of harm is an irreversible digital transaction (EXIT). A regulator cannot oversee a
system if they lack the technical capability to inspect it independent of the operator (AUDIT).
Where digital systems block these channels structurally, the rule of law becomes a legal fiction. External review
mechanisms cannot function meaningfully if the internal architecture is designed to resist observation and modification.
Therefore, corrigibility should be understood not merely as a technical specification, but as the structural precondition
required for the law to take hold of the machine.

6

Extension to Learned Systems

The application of this framework to Artificial Intelligence requires resolving a fundamental crisis of verification.
Earlier formulations of the five tests implicitly assumed a deterministic architecture, where the source code is the
sole arbiter of behavior, inspection reveals logic, and exact reproduction is mechanically trivial. Learned systems
(AI and ML models) dismantle these assumptions. In these systems, identical inputs may yield non-deterministic
outputs; behavior is defined by training data rather than logic gates; and opacity is often an inherent property of the
representation rather than a design choice of the operator.
However, the collapse of deterministic transparency does not invalidate the structural necessity of corrigibility. To
the contrary, as the system’s internal logic becomes less intelligible to human operators, the external capacity for
correction becomes more critical. The five tests remain invariant; only the evidence requirements change.
6.1

The Invariance of the Standard

Proposition 1. The five corrigibility tests remain invariant for learned systems. What changes is the verification method.
The table below illustrates how the mechanical verification of each test adapts to the non-deterministic nature of AI
without softening the structural requirement.

6.2

Test

Deterministic Verification

Learned System Verification

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

Can refuse the system
Disclosure + non-AI alternative
Source code determines behavior Layered transparency across training pipeline
Inspect logic and outputs
Statistical bounds + continuous monitoring
Maintainer and RFC process
Governance over objectives and value tradeoffs
Copy code and deploy
Resource forkability (compute + data)
Table 3: Verification methods for deterministic vs. learned systems

What Is “Source” in a Learned System?

A central challenge in complying with the CODE test is redefining the object of inspection. In a learned system,
behavior is distributed across a pipeline of distinct artifacts. The inference code is merely the execution engine; the
actual behavioral logic is encoded in the weights, which are in turn downstream of the training dataset, filtering
decisions, and RLHF preferences.
Therefore, publishing inference code alone does not satisfy the CODE test. It allows an auditor to run the machine,
but not to understand why it produces specific outputs. To bridge this gap, compliance requires structured disclosure
across the training pipeline, such as Data Sheets for Datasets [Gebru et al., 2021] and Model Cards [Mitchell et al.,
2019]. These artifacts function as the “source code” for structural evaluation; withholding them renders the system a
black box.
9

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

6.3

Aravind

The Temporal Variety Gap

Unlike traditional software, which remains static until explicitly patched, learned systems possess a distinct vulnerability related to time. The variety of the controller (𝑉𝑐 ) is frozen at the moment training completes (𝜃), while the
variety of the world it operates in (𝑉𝑑 ) continues to expand.
(7)

Δ(𝑡) = 𝑉 (disturbance; 𝑡) − 𝑉 (controller; 𝜃)

Without mechanisms for retraining or fine-tuning accessible to the community, the variety gap Δ(𝑡) widens over
time. Thus, AI corrigibility is not a deployment property, but a persistence condition.
𝑉 (Environment)

Variety (𝑉 )

Model 𝜃2
Δ(𝑡)

Model 𝜃1

Time (𝑡)
Retraining
(FORK)

Figure 3: The Temporal Variety Gap. Environmental variety 𝑉 (𝑒) evolves continuously (curve). A fixed model 𝜃
(stepped line) diverges from reality. The shaded area represents accumulated error. Only FORK rights allow the gap
to be closed via retraining.
6.4

Resource Barriers to Forkability

The right to FORK a learned system is constrained by physical resources rather than just copyright. In traditional
software, the cost to fork is the cost of storage; in AI, the cost to fork is the cost of compute.
Layer

Cost

Barrier

Inference code
Minimal
None
Running open weights
Low
Minor
Fine-tuning
Moderate Economic
Retraining from scratch Very high Structural
Table 4: Resource barriers to forking learned systems
If a community has the legal right to fork a model but lacks access to the original training data or the massive compute
clusters required to reproduce it, the “Fork” is illusory.
Claim 1. Legal permission to fork without access to compute or data is meaningless. This is an infrastructure question,
not a licensing question.

7

Empirical Evaluation

To demonstrate the framework’s application, we evaluate systems across three categories: government infrastructure
promoted as “DPI,” platform infrastructure claiming “openness,” and infrastructure that satisfies all five tests.
7.1

Government Infrastructure: The Trap of Partial Compliance

Government-operated systems currently designated as Digital Public Infrastructure frequently exhibit a dangerous
failure mode: they achieve partial compliance on technical tests (EXIT, CODE, AUDIT) while failing structurally
10

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

on governance tests (GOVERN, FORK). By capturing the monopoly on execution, they render the feedback loop
inoperable.
Table 5: Evaluation of Government Infrastructure. Centralized execution leads to consistent structural failure
despite “open standards” rhetoric.
(a) Aadhaar (India) – Mandatory ID
Test

Result

Evidence

EXIT

FAIL

CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

FAIL
FAIL
FAIL
FAIL

Mandatory for essential survival services (PDS, Banking) [Khera,
2019].
Proprietary matcher. Execution logic is opaque.
Independent failure-rate testing prohibited by law.
UIDAI (Operator) acts as Regulator. No citizen veto.
Total centralized capture; cannot be reproduced.
(b) UPI (India) – Payment Rail

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

PARTIAL
PARTIAL
PARTIAL
FAIL
FAIL

Cash exists but network effects coerce adoption.
Open protocol specs; Closed switching logic.
Regulator audits allowed; Public verification blocked.
Bank-controlled governance (NPCI). No user seat.
Hub-and-spoke monopoly cannot be forked.
(c) Pix (Brazil) – Central Bank Payment

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

PARTIAL
PARTIAL
PARTIAL
FAIL
FAIL

Other payment methods exist; increasing state reliance.
Protocol public; Central switch proprietary.
Volume data public; Granular error data private.
Unilateral Central Bank governance.
Cannot be reproduced independently of BCB.

Pattern: All three systems fail GOVERN and FORK. Partial compliance on technical tests does not satisfy the binary
threshold.
7.2

Platform Infrastructure: The Illusion of Openness

In the private sector, systems often leverage "open source" branding while retaining centralized control. This
decoupling of artifact transparency from governance reality creates a distinct failure pattern: the artifacts are public;
the decisions are not.
Pattern: Open artifacts with closed governance. “Open weights” ≠ “open.” “Open source” ≠ “accountable.”
7.3

Corrigible Infrastructure

For contrast, Table 7 summarizes seventeen systems that pass all five tests.
Fork as Correction: OpenSearch, Valkey, LibreOffice, and MariaDB demonstrate Ashby’s Law in practice. Each
emerged when governance variety collapsed: Oracle’s Sun acquisition (2010) triggered LibreOffice and MariaDB;
unilateral license changes triggered OpenSearch (2021) and Valkey (2024). The ecosystem restored requisite variety
through forking.
The framework is governance-agnostic: corporate participation is not disqualifying. Kubernetes (CNCF), Hyperledger,
and Let’s Encrypt all have significant corporate involvement while passing all tests. The test is whether governance
permits correction, not who participates.
License vs. Governance: Redis Ltd. added AGPLv3 in 2025, restoring open licensing. But license is orthogonal to
governance. License determines what you may do with code; governance determines who decides what it becomes.
Redis passes one; Valkey passes both.
11

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

Table 6: Evaluation of Private/Platform Infrastructure. Technical openness (Source/Weights) does not guarantee
structural accountability.
(a) Open-Weights AI (Llama, etc.)
Test

Result

Evidence

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

PASS
PARTIAL
PARTIAL
FAIL
PARTIAL

No vendor lock-in; can run locally.
Weights public; Training Data/RLHF opaque.
Black-box testing possible; Lineage unverifiable.
Safety/Utility trade-offs set unilaterally by firm.
Fine-tune possible; Retraining blocked by resource cost.
(b) Android (AOSP + GMS)

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

PARTIAL
PARTIAL
PARTIAL
FAIL
PARTIAL

Ecosystem lock-in high despite device portability.
OS open source; Identity/Push services proprietary.
OS auditable; Google Services opaque.
Roadmap dictated by Google.
LineageOS possible; App ecosystem breaks without GMS.
(c) Signal Protocol

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

7.4

PASS
PASS
PASS
FAIL
FAIL

No lock-in.
Fully open source (Client/Server).
Cryptographically verifiable.
Foundation acts unilaterally.
Code forkable; Network locked (no federation).

The Taxonomy of Open-Washing

Systems that fail these structural tests frequently employ vocabulary to obscure their closure:
1. Standard-Washing: Adopting open technical standards (like ISO/W3C) as proxy for governance accountability.
2. Open-Washing: Releasing peripheral SDKs while keeping core execution logic proprietary.
3. Multilateral-Washing: Using international endorsements (G20, WB) to substitute for technical auditability.
4. Safety-Washing: Justifying opacity by claiming inspection poses a security risk.
5. Consent-Washing: Obtaining formal consent under conditions of economic coercion.
6. DID-Washing: Deploying decentralized identifiers without decentralized governance (see Section 7.4.1).
7.4.1

DID-Washing: The Layer Confusion Problem

Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) present a distinct challenge to corrigibility evaluation because they separate technical
decentralization from governance decentralization across multiple architectural layers. The W3C DID Core 1.0
specification [W3C, 2022] defines DIDs as “globally unique identifiers” that “do not require a centralized registration
authority.” This technical claim is accurate. However, a system can implement DIDs at the identifier layer while
retaining centralized control at every layer that determines actual utility.
Identity infrastructure comprises at least four functional layers, each with independent governance:
Layer

Function

DID-Washing Failure Mode

Identifier
Credential
Trust
Revocation

Generate and resolve DIDs
Issue verifiable claims about the subject
Determine which credentials are accepted
Invalidate credentials or identifiers

Often decentralized, but meaningless alone
Usually centralized: single issuer dominates
Controlled by policy, trusted lists, or law
Often requires issuer cooperation

Table 8: DID-washing failure modes by layer

12

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

System

Steward

Score

Why Corrigible

Linux Kernel

Linux Foundation

5/5

Let’s Encrypt

ISRG

5/5

Wikipedia

Wikimedia Foundation

5/5

Matrix Protocol
Bluesky (AT Protocol)

Matrix.org Foundation
Bluesky PBC

5/5
5/5

PostgreSQL

PGDG

5/5

IPFS

Protocol Labs

5/5

Bitcoin

Decentralized

5/5

Kubernetes

CNCF

5/5

Firefox

Mozilla Foundation

5/5

Apache HTTP

Apache Foundation

5/5

Apache Kafka

Apache Foundation

5/5

OpenSearch

Linux Foundation

5/5

Valkey

Linux Foundation

5/5

Hyperledger

LF Decentralized Trust

5/5

LibreOffice

Document Foundation

5/5

MariaDB

MariaDB Foundation

5/5

Eclipse IDE

Eclipse Foundation

5/5

Fully reproducible. Full triad (legal, technical,
economic) exists. Independent distributions
prove forkability.
Open source CA, IETF standards, nonprofit
501(c)(3)
CC BY-SA content, public edit history, community RfC governance
Apache 2.0, federated by design, self-hostable
MIT/Apache, portable DID identity, selfhostable PDS
BSD-like license, public mailing lists, major
forks exist
MIT/Apache, public IPIP process, no token
governance
MIT source, public BIP process, proven forks
(BCH, BSV)
Apache 2.0, KEP process, distributions (OpenShift, k3s)
MPL 2.0, nonprofit manifesto, forks (LibreWolf, Tor Browser)
Apache 2.0 license, ASF governance, powers
30% of web
Apache 2.0, KIP process public, Fortune 500
standard
Forked from Elasticsearch; Apache 2.0, multivendor governance
Forked from Redis; BSD license, community
governance restored
Apache 2.0 framework; institutional deployments require separate evaluation
Forked from OpenOffice; LGPL/MPL, nonprofit governance
Forked from MySQL; GPL, foundation governance
EPL 2.0, 386 member orgs, committer-led governance

Table 7: Infrastructure systems satisfying all five corrigibility tests. All systems demonstrate full EXIT, CODE, AUDIT,
GOVERN, and FORK compliance.

13

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

A DID that resolves correctly but is not accepted by any relying party is functionally equivalent to no identity at all.
The identifier is “self-sovereign”; the identity utility is not.
Empirical Examples The EU Digital Identity Wallet (EUDI) under eIDAS 2.0 [European Union, 2024] illustrates
sophisticated DID-washing. The architecture employs selective disclosure credentials and cryptographic proofs
superficially similar to DID/VC ecosystems. However:
• Credential issuance for Person Identification Data is an exclusive government function.
• Trust determination requires registration in Member State Trusted Lists.
• Wallet certification depends on government-approved Qualified Trust Service Providers (QTSPs).
• Trusted Execution Environment dependency hands cryptographic key governance to mobile OS vendors
(Google, Apple).
The result: users control their container (the wallet) but not their capability (the credentials). A Hungarian journalist
critical of the government holds a “decentralized” identifier that can be rendered useless by a single administrative
act: revocation from the trusted list.
India’s DigiLocker exhibits a simpler failure mode. It does not claim to use DIDs; it uses centralized URIs and mandatory
Aadhaar linkage. However, promotional language around “user consent” and “digital empowerment” obscures the
structural reality: users cannot register without Aadhaar, cannot store documents outside government-controlled
infrastructure, and cannot port their identity to alternative systems. This is not DID-washing but consent-washing:
the vocabulary of user control applied to a system that offers none.
Implications for Framework Application DID-washing exploits a gap in naive corrigibility evaluation. A system
may appear to pass CODE (the DID spec is public) and FORK (anyone can implement the spec) while failing at the
trust layer where actual power resides.
The framework must be applied layer by layer (see Section 4.8). For identity systems:
• CODE must be evaluated at each layer: identifier resolution, credential issuance logic, trust framework rules,
and revocation mechanisms.
• GOVERN must ask: who controls the acceptance policy? If a single authority determines which credentials
are valid, governance is centralized regardless of identifier architecture.
• FORK must ask: can a community reproduce the trust framework, not merely the identifier scheme? If
relying parties are legally required to accept only government-issued credentials, forkability is illusory.
A system passes the DID-washing test only if decentralization extends through the full trust stack: issuance, verification, acceptance policy, and revocation governance. Technical decentralization at the identifier layer with governance
centralization at the trust layer is structural theater.
Claim 2. Identifier decentralization is not system decentralization. The corrigibility of an identity system is determined
by its weakest layer across any test dimension.
EXIT CODE AUDIT GOV FORK

Result

Aadhaar

×

×

×

×

×

0/5

UPI

~

~

~

×

×

0/5

Pix

~

~

~

×

×

0/5

Llama etc.

✔

~

~

×

~

1/5

Linux

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

5/5

Let’s Enc.

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

5/5

K8s

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

5/5

Bitcoin

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

5/5

See Table 7

+15 more
✔= Pass

~ = Partial

× = Fail

Figure 4: Comparative evaluation summary. Systems labeled “DPI” (above line) fail structural tests. Corrigible
infrastructure (below line) passes all five. See Table 7 for complete list.

14

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

7.5

Aravind

Implications

The contrast is instructive. Aadhaar and UPI, promoted as model DPI, fail all tests. The seventeen systems in Table 7,
rarely described as “DPI,” pass all tests.
This suggests the “public” in Digital Public Infrastructure often refers to population-scale deployment rather than
public accountability. The framework distinguishes these: scale is not governance.
All systems that pass share common properties:
• Open source with permissive or copyleft licensing
• Nonprofit or community governance structures
• Protocol standardization through open processes (IETF, LKML)
• No monopoly on essential services
Scale does not require capture. Universality does not require opacity. The choice is architectural.

8

Discussion

8.1

The Cybernetics of Binary Evaluation

Critics often argue that this framework’s binary pass/fail topology is too rigid for the complex reality of governance,
proposing instead "maturity models" or graded scorecards. From a cybernetic perspective, we reject this gradation.
Corrigibility is not a variable virtue; it is a structural connectivity state.
In a control system, a feedback loop is either closed or it is open. There is no such thing as a "mostly closed" loop. A
wire that is disconnected by 1 millimeter transmits zero signal.
• A system that allows AUDIT (Sensing) but blocks GOVERN (Actuation) is an Open Loop. It observes
errors but cannot fix them.
• A system that allows GOVERN but blocks EXIT is a Coercive Loop. It traps energy inside the system
until it fails catastrophically.
Partial compliance creates “zombie infrastructure”: systems that maintain the aesthetic of responsiveness while
severing the actual capacity for stability. Therefore, a “Partial” score in this framework represents a Fatal Structural
Failure. A system is either corrigible, or it is not.
The binary model is a deliberate analytical choice. Real systems exhibit continuous variation in feedback quality:
channels may be partially blocked, signals degraded but not absent, corrections slow but not entirely unavailable.
The binary classification discards this nuance for structural clarity.
This trade-off is justified on two grounds. First, the regulatory purpose: a system either meets the threshold for
public legitimacy or it does not. Graduated compliance creates negotiation space that operators exploit. Second,
the cybernetic purpose: a feedback loop either closes or it does not. Partial closure is a category error; a wire that
transmits 50% of the signal does not produce 50% of the regulation.
For diagnostic purposes, gradation remains useful. The auditor schema (Appendix C) preserves continuous measurements in fields like penalty_ratio, visibility, and fix_latency_observed. The binary determination is the
output; the continuous measurements are the inputs. Evaluators can examine the inputs to prioritize interventions
even when the output is uniformly “fail.”
8.2

The Protocol Model of State

A common practical objection holds that governments cannot adopt corrigible infrastructure because they must
retain control over sovereign functions. This objection relies on a category error: it conflates the Platform Model with
the Protocol Model.
In the Platform Model (currently dominant), the state contracts a vendor to build a monolithic silo (e.g., existing
digital ID systems). The vendor controls execution, the state attempts to control policy, and citizens are reduced to
rows in a database. As Cohen [2019] argues, this model inevitably subverts the Rule of Law by replacing legal due
process with optimized platform logic. In the Protocol Model (the corrigible alternative), the state adopts open,
15

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

1. CORRIGIBLE
(Closed Loop)

Operator

2. COERCIVE
(No Exit)

Operator

Action
EXIT/Correction

Mandate

Public

Stable
Error signals reduce
variance.

Public

Unstable
Variance accumulates until rupture.

Public

Drifting
Feedback irrelevant
(signal noise).

Blocked (Aadhaar)

3. OPAQUE
(No Insight)

????

AI Model

Hidden Logic (Black Box)

Figure 5: Topologies of Failure. (1) A corrigible system closes the loop, converting error signals into stability. (2) A
coercive system blocks EXIT, trapping energy. (3) An opaque system obscures the action channel, making feedback
unintelligible.
corrigible protocols and acts as a high-authority participant within them. The state issues credentials and verifies
claims, but it does not enclose the infrastructure itself.
This distinction mirrors the architecture of the web. Governments do not need to build their own proprietary browsers
to deliver services; they build sites on HTTP. Similarly, corrigible DPI implies that the state becomes an issuer of
trust rather than a landlord of infrastructure. This model does not reduce state capacity; it enhances trust by making
the state’s operations verifiable.
8.2.1

Distributed Assessment Capacity

A corollary objection concerns resources: "Who audits?" The framework does not require every citizen to audit
source code. It requires that the infrastructure allows anyone to audit, thereby enabling civil society, journalists, and
specialized firms to perform this function on behalf of the public. Assessment capacity is itself infrastructure. When
systems are designed to be inscrutable, this immune system of society withers.
8.2.2

Structural Preconditions of Law

Legal doctrines such as proportionality analysis, as established in Puttaswamy v. Union of India [Supreme Court of
India, 2017], presuppose that state intrusions can be measured, minimized, and remedied. However, as Bhatia [2019]
argues, when the architecture of a system is opaque or irreversible, these constitutional guarantees become legal
fictions. Corrigibility is the structural precondition required for the law to take hold of the machine.
8.3

Corrigibility in Extremis

Incorrigibility is often justified by appeals to necessity: national security, anti-corruption, or emergency efficiency.
This framework explicitly denies such exemptions. Corrigibility does not imply that substantive rules are negotiable;
a system may enforce strict, non-negotiable limits (e.g., pandemic travel restrictions or environmental caps). However,
the structural capacity to detect error, verify correct enforcement, and reverse wrongful harm must remain intact
even in high-constraint environments. As safety engineering demonstrates, accidents in complex systems are caused
precisely by the lack of appropriate constraints on component interactions [Leveson, 2011].
Claim 3. No exemption from the five tests is granted on the basis of emergency conditions, planetary constraints, or
decentralized architecture.
This applies equally to decentralized systems. Cryptographic immutability is not a substitute for governance. A
blockchain that permanently records a theft without a mechanism for consensus-based reversion is not "trustless";
it is strictly incorrigible. If a system allows for irrevocable harm without recourse, its decentralization is merely a
distribution of unaccountability.
8.4

Implications for Artificial Intelligence

Most contemporary AI systems fail the structural conditions for DPI. While they may satisfy EXIT and CODE (via
open weights), they systematically fail GOVERN and FORK due to the closure of training data.
16

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

We distinguish this from "AI Alignment." Alignment asks: Can the operator control the system? Corrigibility asks: Can
the affected subject correct the system? Structural legitimacy requires the latter.
8.4.1

Corrigibility as an API Contract for Agents

As DPI transitions to support the "Agentic Economy," corrigibility moves from a moral preference to an engineering
requirement. Autonomous agents lack the biological resilience to handle bureaucracy.
• EXIT is Exception Handling: To an agent, a mandatory system with no exit path appears as a logic
deadlock.
• CODE is Documentation: Agents require inspectability of logic to form valid plans.
• AUDIT is Observability: An optimization agent cannot function without a reliable failure signal.
• GOVERN is Constraint Discovery: Advisory guidelines result in undefined behavior for software agents.
Claim 4. Incorrigible infrastructure is structurally incompatible with AI automation.
8.5

The Essential Services Problem

A pattern emerges from Section 7: systems that pass all five tests are disproportionately non-essential infrastructure.
Linux, PostgreSQL, Kubernetes, and Let’s Encrypt power critical operations, but no individual’s survival depends
on accessing them. The systems promoted as DPI, which mediate access to food, banking, healthcare, and mobility,
consistently fail.
This correlation reflects a structural tension between essentiality and corrigibility.
8.5.1

The Essentiality Trap

Essential services create the economic coercion that undermines EXIT. When refusal means exclusion from survival,
the feedback loop breaks regardless of other properties. Hirschman [Hirschman, 1970] observed that exit is effective
precisely because it is voluntary. The credible threat of departure disciplines the system. When departure means
death (literal or social), exit ceases to function as feedback. It becomes self-exclusion.
The systems in Table 7 avoid this trap because alternatives exist. A developer who dislikes the Linux kernel’s direction
can migrate to BSD without losing the ability to compute. A journalist who distrusts Let’s Encrypt can obtain
certificates elsewhere. The existence of functional alternatives preserves the error signal.
Aadhaar has been made prerequisite to existence. Documented cases demonstrate the consequence: at least 27
starvation deaths in India between 2015 and 2018 were attributed to Aadhaar-related exclusion from food rations
[Khera, 2017]. These deaths are not anomalies; they are the structural prediction of a system that blocks EXIT while
governing essential services.
8.5.2

Architectural Responses

The tension admits two resolutions, both architectural:
Protected Alternatives. Essential services can remain corrigible if law guarantees functional non-digital equivalents. Cash preserves UPI’s partial EXIT; eliminating cash would collapse UPI to Aadhaar’s structural status.
Corrigibility for essential services requires that non-digital pathways remain legally protected, not merely tolerated.
This is the lesson of the UPI/Aadhaar contrast. Both are Indian government systems operating at population scale.
UPI achieves partial EXIT because cash exists; Aadhaar achieves zero EXIT because alternatives have been legally
foreclosed. The difference is not in the systems’ design but in the ecosystem constraint: whether alternatives are
permitted.
Federated Implementation. Rather than a single provider of essential infrastructure, services could be delivered
through multiple independent implementations of open protocols. This is analogous to email (SMTP) rather than
messaging (proprietary platforms).
Under this model, no single implementation would be essential; the protocol would be. A citizen excluded from one
provider could obtain equivalent service from another. Estonian X-Road approaches this architecture: the protocol is
open, implementations are distributed across institutions, and the Nordic Institute for Interoperability Solutions (NIIS)
17

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

provides multi-stakeholder governance. Citizens cannot opt out of the data exchange layer, but no single institution
controls their access to all services.
X-Road demonstrates that scale and corrigibility are compatible. It passes CODE (MIT-licensed), AUDIT (transaction
logs, public enforcement against misuse), GOVERN (multi-national NIIS), and FORK (deployed in 25+ countries). It
fails full EXIT but compensates through strong performance on the other four tests. This compensation is unstable (it
depends on continued good-faith governance) but it proves that population-scale infrastructure need not exhibit the
total capture of Aadhaar.
8.5.3

The Finding

The absence of fully corrigible essential services is not a limitation of this framework; it is the framework’s central
finding. The question “Can essential DPI be fully corrigible?” is empirically answered: not under architectures that
eliminate alternatives.
8.6

Transition Paths

The framework diagnoses incorrigibility but does not prescribe political remedies. However, the structure of the
five tests implies an ordering for transition: certain tests are prerequisites for others, and certain interventions have
higher leverage.
8.6.1

Ordered Priorities

The tests form a dependency chain when considered as a transition sequence:
1. EXIT first. Restore exit before other tests. Without exit, no other reform creates genuine feedback. This
requires either eliminating mandatory linkage laws or guaranteeing functional non-digital alternatives. EXIT
is the error signal; without it, the system cannot sense its own failures.
2. CODE before AUDIT. Transparency must precede verification. Independent testing is meaningful only if
the testing target is observable. Publishing audit results for a black box proves nothing about the box.
3. AUDIT before GOVERN. Verified error data creates political pressure for governance reform. Governance
without measurement is arbitrary. There is no basis for determining whether constraints are adequate. The
sensor must function before the actuator can be calibrated.
4. GOVERN enables FORK. Structural governance can mandate open licensing, data portability, and interoperability requirements that enable eventual forkability. GOVERN without FORK leaves the system captive to
its current steward; FORK without GOVERN may produce fragmentation without accountability.
This sequence reflects the causal structure of the feedback loop: signal, sensing, transmission, actuation, selection.
Interventions at later stages are ineffective if earlier stages are broken.
8.6.2

Phase Transitions

The transition is not gradual improvement. It is a series of phase transitions. Each test either passes or fails; the
system remains incorrigible until all five pass. A system that achieves CODE but not EXIT has become transparent
without becoming accountable. Users can see their oppression; they cannot escape it.
This explains why open-washing is effective: partial progress creates the appearance of reform while preserving
structural capture. The framework rejects partial credit precisely because partial feedback loops do not partially
function.
8.6.3

Political Economy

The political economy of transition varies by test:
Test

Transition Barrier

Concentrated Opposition

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

Mandatory linkage laws
Intellectual property claims
Security-through-obscurity claims
Sovereignty objections
Typically least opposed

Operators lose captive users
Vendors lose competitive moats
Operators lose narrative control
Executives lose discretion
Requires only licensing and documentation

Table 9: Political economy of transition by test

18

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

FORK is typically the least opposed transition because it requires only legal permission and technical documentation.
It does not immediately threaten operator control. However, FORK without the prior four tests is meaningless: the
right to reproduce a system you cannot inspect, verify, govern, or exit provides no actual power.
8.6.4

Cost Considerations

Transition is not costless. The European Commission [European Commission, 2021] estimated that public sector
open-source adoption yields cost-benefit ratios above 1:4, but this ratio assumes successful implementation. Transition
costs include personnel retraining, system compatibility engineering, procurement policy updates, and organizational
change.
However, these costs must be weighed against the costs of continued incorrigibility:
• Litigation costs from unresolvable grievances
• Political instability from suppressed correction demand (Section 5.2)
• Technical debt from opacity-enabled shortcuts
• Vendor lock-in premiums from non-forkable dependencies
• Human costs: documented deaths, exclusions, and deprivations
The systems in Table 7 demonstrate that corrigibility at scale is economically sustainable. Linux, Kubernetes, and
Let’s Encrypt operate at population scale with resource models that have proven durable over decades.

9

Conclusion

Digital Public Infrastructure is not a specific technology; it is a claim of political legitimacy. It asserts that a system is
sufficiently foundational, accessible, and accountable to serve as the substrate of civic life.
This paper argues that such legitimacy cannot be derived from self-declarations, "open standards" labeling, or
multilateral endorsements. It relies on a specific cybernetic property: Corrigibility. The capacity of the governed to
observe the rules, verify their execution, limit their reach, and, if necessary, reproduce the infrastructure to escape its
capture.
We have proposed five rigorous tests to verify this capacity. Systems currently touted as DPI models (Aadhaar, UPI,
proprietary AI) fail these tests. They are administrative walled gardens, not public goods. The systems that actually
run the world (Linux, Kubernetes, the Web) pass them structurally.
The choice is not between chaos and control. It is between Open Loop systems that drift toward fragility and
authoritarianism, and Closed Loop systems that stabilize themselves through the correction of those they serve.
Systems that cannot be corrected by those they affect will eventually be corrected by forces they cannot
control.
9.1

Limitations

This framework has the following limitations:
1. Binary classification loses diagnostic information. A system failing one test is treated identically to one
failing all five for the purpose of the corrigibility determination. This is structurally correct (a broken feedback
loop is broken regardless of where it breaks) but diagnostically impoverished. The schema (Appendix C)
preserves gradation in fields like penalty_ratio and visibility, but the final determination collapses
to binary.
2. Governance evaluation is judgment-dependent. CODE and FORK have clear verification criteria for
code artifacts. GOVERN is harder to verify: governance claims require historical evidence of enforcement,
and such evidence may be contested or incomplete. The evidentiary standards in Appendix D address this,
but governance evaluation remains more interpretation-dependent than technical evaluation.
3. No fully corrigible essential services are identified. The seventeen systems in Table 7 are non-essential
infrastructure. Estonian X-Road approaches corrigibility but fails full EXIT. The framework may describe
a category that is structurally empty for essential services under current political economy. If so, this is a
finding, not a flaw, but it limits immediate prescriptive utility.
4. Resource forkability for AI remains unresolved. Section 6.4 identifies that legal rights without compute
access may be permanently unfulfillable for large AI systems. The framework diagnoses this as a structural
19

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

barrier to FORK but does not resolve the underlying resource asymmetry. Whether “compute as infrastructure”
could make AI forkability meaningful is an open question.
5. The timescale argument applies to external remedies. Section 5.1 argues that bureaucratic correction is
structurally too slow for digital-time errors. However, some corrigible systems (Bitcoin’s BIP process, Linux’s
kernel mailing list) operate on human timescales and are accepted as valid governance. The distinction is
that these mechanisms are internal to the technical community, not external bureaucracies. The timescale
critique applies to external remedies (courts, ombudsmen), not to all deliberative processes.
6. Network effects are acknowledged but not formally modeled. The FORK test requires that reproduction
be economically feasible, but network effects can make formally forkable systems practically unforkable.
Signal’s code is fully open; its network is not federated. A Signal fork without users is not a meaningful
check on Signal Foundation governance. The framework flags this (Table 6c) but does not provide a formal
treatment of network-effect capture.
9.2

Future Work

Several extensions warrant investigation:
1. Empirical measurement of correction velocity. The velocity inequality (Section 5.1) predicts system
instability when correction latency exceeds error accumulation rate. Historical case studies (PDS exclusion
incidents, payment system outages, identity fraud waves) could quantify the threshold at which systems
become ungovernable.
2. International comparative analysis. This paper focuses substantially on India Stack. Systematic comparison with Estonian X-Road, Singapore’s National Digital Identity, the EU Digital Identity Wallet, and Brazil’s
Pix would test the framework’s generality across political systems.
3. Economic modeling of transition costs. What does it cost to make an incorrigible system corrigible?
Infrastructure-specific cost modeling, particularly for systems with existing vendor lock-in, would inform
policy prioritization.
4. AI-specific verification protocols. The CODE test for learned systems (Section 6.2) requires layered
transparency across the training pipeline. Developing standardized, machine-verifiable disclosure formats
would enable systematic AI corrigibility assessment.
5. Legal doctrine integration. Constitutional courts increasingly review digital infrastructure. How should
such courts operationalize corrigibility? Integration with proportionality analysis, due process doctrine, and
administrative law would extend the framework’s applicability.
6. Network effect formalization. A formal model of network-effect capture, specifying when a technically
forkable system becomes practically unforkable, would sharpen the FORK test’s application to platform
infrastructure.
7. Agentic system requirements. Section 8.4.1 sketches how AI agents require corrigible infrastructure. Specifying precise API contracts for agent-compatible infrastructure would translate corrigibility requirements
into engineering specifications.

Acknowledgments
This framework was developed through analysis of India Stack and subsequent generalization to universal criteria.
The author thanks the digital rights community for ongoing critique and refinement.

License
This work is released under CC0 1.0 Universal (Public Domain). Use, adapt, translate, and redistribute freely. No
attribution required.

Data and Code Availability
The complete framework, including JSON Schemas for machine-readable disclosure and assessment, is available at:
• Framework documentation: https://indiastack.in/dpi/
20

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

• Infrastructure manifest schema: https://indiastack.in/dpi/schema/infrastructure.json
• Corrigibility assessment schema: https://indiastack.in/dpi/schema/corrigibility.json
• Paper source and repository: https://github.com/AnivarAravind/corrigibility-framework

References
Ashby, W. Ross. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman & Hall, 1956.
Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
Stallman, Richard. Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays. GNU Press, 2002.
Winner, Langdon. Do Artifacts Have Politics? Daedalus, 109(1):121–136, 1980.
Hirschman, Albert O. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States. Harvard
University Press, 1970.
Lessig, Lawrence. Code: Version 2.0. Basic Books, 2006.
Bowker, Geoffrey C. and Star, Susan Leigh. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences. MIT Press, 1999.
G20. New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration. G20 Summit, September 2023.
United Nations Development Programme. Digital Public Infrastructure: Definitions and Core Concepts. UNDP Digital
Strategy Office, 2024.
Gebru, Timnit, Morgenstern, Jamie, Vecchione, Briana, et al. Datasheets for Datasets. Communications of the ACM,
64(12):86–92, 2021.
Mitchell, Margaret, Wu, Simone, Zaldivar, Andrew, et al. Model Cards for Model Reporting. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 220–229, 2019.
Bhatia, Gautam. The Transformative Constitution: A Radical Biography in Nine Acts. HarperCollins India, 2019.
Leveson, Nancy G. Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety. MIT Press, 2011.
Khera, Reetika. Dissent on Aadhaar: Big Data Meets Big Brother. Orient BlackSwan, 2019.
Cohen, Julie E. Between Truth and Power: The Legal Constructions of Informational Capitalism. Oxford University
Press, 2019.
Supreme Court of India. Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012, (2017)
10 SCC 1.
Collingridge, David. The Social Control of Technology. Frances Pinter, 1980.
European Commission. The Impact of Open Source Software and Hardware on Technological Independence, Competitiveness and Innovation in the EU Economy. Publications Office of the European Union, 2021. DOI: 10.2759/430161.
Khera, Reetika. Impact of Aadhaar on Welfare Programmes. Economic & Political Weekly, 52(50), December 2017.
Pasquale, Frank. The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control Money and Information. Harvard University
Press, 2015.
World Wide Web Consortium. Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0. W3C Recommendation, July 19, 2022. https:
//www.w3.org/TR/did-core/
European Union. Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 (eIDAS 2.0). Official Journal of
the European Union, 2024.

A

Architecture of Accountability

To move beyond qualitative debate, this framework establishes a formal logic for accountability. The machine-readable
artifacts described below serve not merely as data formats, but as a digital accountability contract that separates
operator claims from auditor verification. By enforcing specific data structures, we convert policy rhetoric into
falsifiable assertions of system state.
21

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

A.1

Aravind

Logic: The Adversarial Manifests

The architecture relies on a separation of concerns mirroring the adversarial legal process. It employs two distinct
document types (see Figure 6):
1. infrastructure.json (The Operator’s Affidavit): A signed declaration by the system operator asserting
specific operational properties, governance commitments, and functional limitations.
2. corrigibility.json (The Auditor’s Finding): An independent, cryptographically signed evaluation that
tests the operator’s claims against observable reality.
This architecture makes contradictions machine-readable. If an operator claims a governance mechanism is "binding"
in their affidavit, but the auditor’s observation marks the user_authority field as "advisory," the mismatch serves
as mathematically verifiable proof of governance failure.
Operator

Auditor

infrastructure.json

corrigibility.json
findings

claims

Compare

Figure 6: Adversarial Verification Architecture. Operators declare; Auditors verify. The structural gap constitutes the
audit finding.

A.2

Interpretation: The Non-Authoritativeness of Determination

A critical logic gate in this framework is the derivation of status.
Claim 5. The determination object in corrigibility.json is a derived convenience field. It is not authoritative.
Any value asserted in determination MUST be mechanically recomputed from the tests object by evaluators
or courts. If an auditor asserts corrigible: true but the tests object contains a failure, the manifest is strictly
invalid. This rule ensures that no actor (operator, auditor, or regulator) can “declare” a system corrigible by fiat. Status
exists only as the computed sum of observable structural properties.

B

Formal Structural Proofs

To formalize the assertion that “partial corrigibility is a fatal structural failure,” we model Digital Public Infrastructure
as a standard feedback control system subject to environmental disturbance.
B.1

Control-Theoretic Model

We model DPI as a feedback control system with the following components:
• 𝑟(𝑡): Reference signal (user intent, legitimate expectation)
• 𝑦(𝑡): System output (experienced outcome)
• 𝑒(𝑡) = 𝑟(𝑡) − 𝑦(𝑡): Error signal (grievance)
• 𝑑(𝑡): Environmental disturbance (fraud, edge cases, shocks)
• 𝑃(𝑠): Plant transfer function (code + infrastructure)
• 𝐾 (𝑠): Controller transfer function (GOVERN)
• 𝐻 (𝑠): Sensor transfer function (AUDIT/EXIT)
22

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

𝑑(𝑡)

Disturbance

GOVERN

+

𝑟(𝑡)

𝑒(𝑡)

𝐾 (𝑠)

CODE

𝑢(𝑡)

+

𝑃(𝑠)

𝑦(𝑡)

−

𝐻 (𝑠)
AUDIT/EXIT

Figure 7: Control-theoretic model of corrigible infrastructure. 𝐾 (𝑠): governance controller. 𝐻 (𝑠): sensor/audit
function. 𝑃(𝑠): plant (infrastructure). 𝑑(𝑡): environmental disturbance.
The closed-loop transfer function from reference to output is:
𝑌 (𝑠)
𝐾 (𝑠)𝑃(𝑠)
=
𝑅(𝑠) 1 + 𝐾 (𝑠)𝑃(𝑠)𝐻 (𝑠)

(8)

The transfer function from disturbance to output is:
𝑌 (𝑠)
𝑃(𝑠)
=
𝐷(𝑠) 1 + 𝐾 (𝑠)𝑃(𝑠)𝐻 (𝑠)

(9)

Corrigibility requires that each component exists and is non-degenerate:
• EXIT ⇒ 𝑒(𝑡) ≠ 0 observable (error signal exists)
• AUDIT ⇒ 𝐻 (𝑠) ≠ 0 (sensor functional)
• GOVERN ⇒ 𝐾 (𝑠) ≠ 0 (actuator functional)
• CODE ⇒ 𝑃(𝑠) is intelligible
• FORK ⇒ 𝑃, 𝐾 , 𝐻 replaceable if convergence fails
B.2

Theorem 1: Null-Feedback Instability (Fatal Failure)

Theorem 1 (Null-Feedback Instability). If any one of the following holds:
𝐻 = 0 or 𝐾 = 0 or

𝑒(𝑡) ≡ 0

(10)

then for any non-trivial disturbance process 𝑑(𝑡) with non-zero mean or variance, the expected error magnitude diverges:
𝔼[|𝑒(𝑡)|] → ∞

as 𝑡 → ∞

(11)

The system operates as an open-loop controller and is structurally unstable.
Proof (Sketch). We consider three cases.
Case 1: Sensor Failure (AUDIT = 0).

If 𝐻 = 0, the controller receives no independent measurement of output:
𝑢(𝑡) = 𝐾 (0, 𝑒(𝑡))

(12)

Corrective action is decoupled from real system state. For any disturbance 𝑑(𝑡) such that 𝔼[𝑑(𝑡)] ≠ 0 or Var(𝑑(𝑡)) > 0,
the output evolves as 𝑦(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑃(𝑢(𝑡), 𝑑(𝑡)). Since 𝑢(𝑡) is invariant to 𝑦(𝑡), disturbance accumulates uncorrected.
By standard results in stochastic control, the variance of 𝑦(𝑡) grows without bound. Hence 𝔼[|𝑒(𝑡)|] → ∞.
Case 2: Actuator Failure (GOVERN = 0). If 𝐾 = 0, then 𝑢(𝑡) = 0. The system cannot apply corrective force even
if error is detected. This is equivalent to a passive observer system. Under persistent disturbance, output drift is
unopposed. This corresponds to a purely observational regime: post-hoc courts without enforcement power. Expected
error diverges.
Case 3: Error Signal Suppression (EXIT = 0). If exit or refusal is blocked, then 𝑒(𝑡) ≡ 0. The controller is
mathematically forced to treat all outputs as acceptable. This is reference collapse: the system cannot detect deviation
from user intent. Any disturbance, bias, or misalignment becomes structurally invisible. Drift is undetectable and
uncorrectable.
23

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

Conclusion. In all cases, removal of any single corrigibility component breaks the feedback loop. The system
becomes open-loop. Open-loop systems acting on complex, stochastic environments are guaranteed to diverge.

𝐾 (𝑠)

𝑢(𝑡)

𝑃(𝑠)

𝑦(𝑡)

𝐻 (𝑠)
AUDIT = 0: Sensor Blindness

Figure 8: Open-loop failure mode. When AUDIT fails (𝐻 = 0), the feedback path is severed. Equivalent failure occurs
if GOVERN (𝐾 = 0) or EXIT (𝑒(𝑡) ≡ 0) is removed.
B.3

Corollary: Binary Fatal Failure Property

Corollary 1. Corrigibility is a binary structural property. If any one of the five tests (EXIT, CODE, AUDIT, GOVERN,
FORK) fails, the system is incorrigible.
Justification: Each test corresponds to a necessary component of the feedback loop. Partial compliance does not
preserve loop closure.
B.4

Theorem 2: Correction Velocity Inequality

Theorem 2 (Correction Velocity Condition). Let 𝐸(𝑡) be cumulative severity-weighted error generated up to time 𝑡,
and 𝐶(𝑡) be cumulative effective correction applied up to time 𝑡. A system is dynamically stable only if:
𝑑
𝑑
𝐶(𝑡) ≥ 𝐸(𝑡) + 𝜀 for some 𝜀 > 0
(13)
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑡
If 𝑑𝑡𝑑 𝐶(𝑡) < 𝑑𝑡𝑑 𝐸(𝑡), then expected system harm diverges.
Interpretation.
• 𝐸(𝑡): rate of harm introduction (edge cases, fraud, shocks)
• 𝐶(𝑡): rate of effective correction (binding fixes, reversals)
Courts, ombudsmen, and manual grievance redress operate on bureaucratic time (months to years). Digital systems
operate on computational time (milliseconds to days). Thus:
𝑑𝐸digital
𝑑𝐶bureaucratic
≪
(14)
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑡
This inequality formalizes why post-hoc legal remedies cannot stabilize DPI. The correction logic must be intrinsic to
the loop.
Magnitude
𝐸(𝑡)
Instability

𝐶(𝑡)

Time

Figure 9: Correction velocity mismatch. Error 𝐸(𝑡) accumulates faster than correction 𝐶(𝑡) in bureaucratic systems.
The shaded region represents accumulated unresolved harm.
24

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

B.5

Aravind

Theorem 3: Variety Collapse Without Fork (Ashby Necessity)

Theorem 3 (Variety Collapse). Let 𝑉𝐷 (𝑡) be environmental variety and 𝑉𝑅 be regulatory variety. If 𝑉𝑅 < 𝑉𝐷 (𝑡) and no
mechanism exists to increase 𝑉𝑅 (i.e., no FORK), then control failure is inevitable.
Explanation: Without forking, regulatory variety is capped by a single operator. Environmental variety grows with
population size, adversarial pressure, and time. Forking is the only mechanism that increases regulatory variety
beyond operator limits.
B.6

Mapping to the Five Tests
Test

Control Component

Failure Mode

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

Error Signal
Signal Integrity
Sensor
Actuator
Variety Expansion

Reference collapse
Noise indistinguishable from intent
Blind control
No corrective force
Monolithic collapse

Table 10: Mapping corrigibility tests to control-theoretic components

B.7

Agentic Interoperability Requirements

For an autonomous agent  to operate reliably within infrastructure , the following predicates must be strictly True:
1. Reversibility: ∀ state 𝑠𝑡 ∈ , ∃ transition 𝑠𝑡+1 (via EXIT) such that Cost(𝑠𝑡+1 ) < ∞. (No deadlocks.)
2. Decidability: ∀ input 𝑥, Compute(𝑥) → {0, 1} is inspectable via CODE. (No hidden constraints.)
Failure of these predicates renders  a “Hazmat Environment” for automated agents, effectively blocking the agentic
economy.
Idle

Call API

retry

2xx

Success

done

blocked

Blocked
(No Exit)

timeout

Error

Figure 10: Agentic automaton. Without EXIT and observable error codes, agent loops indefinitely, times out, or
escalates incorrectly.
B.8
B.8.1

Extended Formal Models
Linearized Sensitivity Model

For small deviations around an operating point, let 𝑃(𝑠), 𝐻 (𝑠), 𝐾 (𝑠) be LTI transfer functions. Define loop gain
𝐿(𝑠) ∶= 𝐾 (𝑠)𝐻 (𝑠)𝑃(𝑠) and sensitivity function:
1
1 + 𝐿(𝑠)

(15)

𝑌 (𝑠) = 𝑆(𝑠) ⋅ 𝐷(𝑠)

(16)

𝑆(𝑠) ∶=
The closed-loop response to disturbance is:

Corrigibility requires 𝐿(𝑠) non-degenerate so that |𝑆(𝑗𝜔)| attenuates disturbances in the control band. When any test
fails, 𝐿(𝑠) → 0 and 𝑆(𝑠) → 1: disturbances pass through unattenuated.
25

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

B.8.2

Aravind

Discrete Integrator Example

Consider discrete-time scalar integrator:
(17)

𝑦𝑘+1 = 𝑦𝑘 + 𝑑𝑘 + 𝑢𝑘
With control law 𝑢𝑘 = −𝛾 𝑦̂ 𝑘 where 𝑦̂ 𝑘 is measured output. If measurement or actuator is removed, 𝑢𝑘 ≡ 0 and:
𝑘−1

(18)

𝑦𝑘 = 𝑦0 + ∑ 𝑑𝑖
𝑖=0

If 𝑑𝑖 are i.i.d. with 𝔼[𝑑𝑖 ] = 𝜇 > 0, then 𝔼[𝑦𝑘 ] = 𝑦0 + 𝑘𝜇. Linear growth guarantees divergence.
B.8.3

Formal Error and Correction Rates

Definition 1 (Error Generation Rate). Let {𝑒𝑖 } be incidents with severity 𝑠𝑖 ≥ 0 and arrival rate 𝜆(𝑡). Define instantaneous
expected error rate:
𝑡

(𝑡) ∶= 𝜆(𝑡) ⋅ 𝔼[𝑠𝑖 ],

𝐸(𝑡) = ∫

(𝜏) 𝑑𝜏

(19)

0

Definition 2 (Effective Correction Rate). Let corrective actions 𝑗 occur at rate 𝜌𝑗 (𝑡) with effectiveness 𝜂𝑗 ∈ [0, 1]. Define:
𝑡

(𝑡) ∶= ∑ 𝜌𝑗 (𝑡) ⋅ 𝜂𝑗 ,

𝐶(𝑡) = ∫

(𝜏) 𝑑𝜏

(20)

0

𝑗

̇
Model unresolved backlog 𝐵(𝑡) as 𝐵(𝑡)
= (𝑡) − (𝑡). If  ≥  + 𝜀, backlog decreases. If  < , backlog grows
without bound.
B.9

Operational Proxies and Thresholds
Test

Proxy Metric

Illustrative Threshold

EXIT
CODE
AUDIT
GOVERN
FORK

Penalty ratio 𝑝
Visibility fraction 𝑣
Mean time to detect (MTTD)
Bindingness + throughput 𝜏
Resource feasibility ratio 𝑟

𝑝 ≤ 1.2
𝑣 ≥ 0.9
MTTD ≤ 24 hours
binding = true, 𝜏 ≥ 1 per 10k users/day
𝑟 ≤ 10−3

Table 11: Operational proxies for the five tests. Thresholds are illustrative.

Interpretation.
• Penalty ratio 𝑝 = cost(non-digital alternative) / cost(digital).
• Visibility 𝑣 = public LOC / total LOC on critical execution path.
• Resource ratio 𝑟 = estimated FLOP to retrain / aggregate community compute capacity.
B.10

Network Adoption Model for Fork Feasibility

Model adoption fraction 𝛼(𝑡). A community-spawned fork succeeds if 𝛼 crosses critical mass 𝛼 ∗ . Logistic adoption
with social influence:
𝛼̇ = 𝛽 𝛼(1 − 𝛼) + 𝑠(𝑡)
(21)
where 𝑠(𝑡) is exogenous seeding. Fork feasibility requires parameters such that ∃𝑡 with 𝛼(𝑡) ≥ 𝛼 ∗ . Practical condition:
𝑠min ≥ 𝛼 ∗ − 𝛼0
or subsidies that accelerate adoption rate 𝛽.
26

(22)

Final adoption 𝛼(∞)

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

1

0.5
Logistic 𝛽 = 3
Critical mass 𝛼 ∗ = 0.5
0

0

5 ⋅ 10−2

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Seed fraction 𝑠
Figure 11: Fork feasibility curve. Below critical seeding, adoption does not reach critical mass. Parameters illustrative.
B.11

Summary of Formal Extensions
1. Linearized result ties removal of 𝐻 , 𝐾 , or EXIT to vanishing loop gain 𝐿(𝑠), exposing unstable process modes.
2. Integrator example supplies simple, indisputable divergence demonstration.
3. Correction velocity formalized via measurable (𝑡) and (𝑡).
4. Network model clarifies why legal forkability may fail in practice and yields policy levers (seeding, subsidies).
5. Agent automaton demonstrates need for explicit machine-facing EXIT/CODE/AUDIT primitives.

C

Schema Specifications (v1.7)

The current schemas are normative. Implementations must validate against these structures to generate valid proofs
of corrigibility.
C.1

Infrastructure Manifest (Operator Disclosure)

This schema forces operators to make definitive commitments. Note the specific inclusion of offline_equivalent
to track the EXIT test, when_uncertain to track AI safety failures, and layers to support layer-decomposed
evaluation.
Listing 1: Operator Disclosure Schema (condensed)
{
"$id": "https://indiastack.in/dpi/schema/infrastructure.json",
"title": "DPI Operational Manifest v1.7",
"required": ["meta", "access", "governance"],
"properties": {
"schema_version": {
"const": "1.7",
"description": "Schema version for forward compatibility"
},
"meta": {
"required": ["system_id", "deployment", "lifecycle"],
"properties": {
"system_id": { "type": "string" },
"deployment": { "enum": ["production","staging","pilot"] },
"lifecycle": { "enum": ["active","deprecated","archived"] }
}
},
"governance": {
"required": ["model", "escalation_paths"],
"properties": {
"model": { "enum": ["community","foundation","corporate",
"government","closed"] },
"escalation_paths": [{
"required": ["level","url","binding"],
"binding": { "type": "boolean" }
}]
}
},
"layers": {
"type": "array",
"description": "Architectural layers ordered by proximity to user impact",
"items": {
"type": "object",

27

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

"required": ["layer_name", "controller", "transparency"],
"properties": {
"layer_name": { "type": "string" },
"controller": { "type": "string",
"description": "Entity with governance authority over this layer" },
"transparency": { "enum": ["full", "partial", "none"] },
"forkable": { "type": "boolean" }
}
}
},
"learned_components": [{
"role": { "enum": ["advisory","decision","enforcement"] },
"when_uncertain": { "enum": ["escalates","fails_open",
"fails_closed","silent"] }
}],
"access": {
"required": ["offline_equivalent"],
"offline_equivalent": { "type": "boolean" }
}
}
}

C.2

Corrigibility Assessment (Auditor Assessment)

The auditor schema replaces subjective grading with hard observational measurements. Note the penalty_ratio,
which quantifies the coerciveness of the system (the cost difference between digital and manual access), and
layer_assessments for layer-decomposed evaluation.
Listing 2: Auditor Assessment Schema (condensed)
{
"$id": "https://indiastack.in/dpi/schema/corrigibility.json",
"title": "Corrigibility Assessment v1.7",
"required": ["target","assessed_by","assessed_at","tests","determination"],
"properties": {
"target": { "type": "string" },
"assessed_by": { "type": "string" },
"assessed_at": { "type": "string", "format": "date-time" },
"assessment_validity_period": {
"type": "string", "format": "duration",
"description": "ISO 8601 duration (e.g., P6M for 6 months)"
},
"tests": {
"required": ["exit","code","audit","govern","fork"],
"exit": { "pass": "boolean", "penalty_ratio": "number" },
"code": { "pass": "boolean",
"visibility": { "enum": ["full","partial","none"] } },
"audit": { "pass": "boolean", "fix_latency_observed": "string" },
"govern": { "pass": "boolean",
"user_authority": { "enum": ["binding","veto",
"advisory","none"] } },
"fork": { "pass": "boolean", "barriers": ["string"] }
},
"layer_assessments": {
"type": "array",
"description": "Per-layer test results for layer-decomposed evaluation",
"items": {
"type": "object",
"required": ["layer_name", "tests"],
"properties": {
"layer_name": { "type": "string" },
"tests": {
"type": "object",
"properties": {
"exit": { "type": "boolean" },
"code": { "type": "boolean" },
"audit": { "type": "boolean" },
"govern": { "type": "boolean" },
"fork": { "type": "boolean" }
}
}
}
}
},
"determination": {
"description": "Derived outcome. MUST be recomputed by evaluators.",
"required": ["corrigible","tests_passed"],
"corrigible": { "type": "boolean",

28

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

"description": "TRUE iff tests_passed == 5" },
"tests_passed": { "type": "integer", "minimum": 0, "maximum": 5 }
}
}
}

D

Verification and Enforcement

To distinguish valid governance from performative compliance, the framework enforces strict evidentiary rules for
Identity and Authority.
D.1

Normative Rules

Rule A.9: Operational Definition of Binding Authority To satisfy the GOVERN test, any escalation path claimed
as "binding" in the Manifest MUST include: (i) a resolvable reference to the statute or charter (binding_proof_url),
(ii) a cryptographic hash of that instrument to prevent silent amendment, and (iii) historical evidence of enforcement
against the operator. Assertions of authority that rely on post-execution bureaucratic discretion (e.g., ombudsmen,
"feedback forms") DO NOT satisfy this rule and must be marked false.
Rule A.10: Chain of Custody Auditor manifests must be consistently serialized (RFC 8785 JSON Canonicalization),
hashed (SHA-256), and signed (Ed25519) using a valid W3C Decentralized Identifier. Unsigned assessments are treated
as schema-invalid. This creates a permanent, falsifiable record of who certified a system.
D.2

Identity Assurance Model

To prevent “Identity Washing” (where operators use temporary keys to rubber-stamp their own systems), the
framework employs a Tiered Assurance Model. Verification dashboards should weigh assessments accordingly:
1. Tier 1: Self-Attested (did:key): Temporary identity. Suitable for whistleblowers, individual researchers,
or rapid-response checks. Status: Informational.
2. Tier 2: Domain-Verified (did:web): Identity cryptographically bound to a specific DNS domain (e.g.,
did:web:eff.org). Attribution to known civil society actors. Status: Verified.
3. Tier 3: Institution-Verified: Identity anchored in transparency logs or institutional trust registries. Status:
Regulatory Standing.

E

Framework Evolution

This framework did not evolve through theoretical speculation; it hardened through adversarial engagement with
live systems. Each version update represents the closure of a specific "loophole" used by operators to claim public
legitimacy while retaining private control.
Version 1.0 (Definition)
Established the baseline thesis: Corrigibility is a structural precondition, distinct from feature sets. It defined the five
tests to answer the foundational question: What distinguishes public infrastructure from private monopoly?
Version 1.2 (Assessment)
Closed the Self-Attestation Loophole. Early trials showed operators self-declaring success. This version separated
the Infrastructure Manifest from the Corrigibility Assessment, establishing the adversarial verification model where
publicness must be proven by independent parties.
Version 1.4 (Logic)
Closed the Ambiguity Loophole. Eliminated partial credit and "maturity models." The shift to strictly binary logic
established that failure in any single dimension breaks the feedback loop required by Ashby’s Law, rendering the
system unstable.
Version 1.5 (Invariance)
Closed the Exceptionalism Loophole. Extended the framework to AI and decentralized ledgers, demonstrating that
neither statistical opacity nor cryptographic immutability exempts a system from the requirements of Reversibility
(EXIT) and Correction (GOVERN).
29

Corrigibility as a Structural Precondition for DPI

Aravind

Version 1.6 (Constraint)
Closed the Consultation Loophole. Redefined GOVERN as non-overrideable internal constraint rather than advice
or redress. Explicitly disqualified post-execution remedies and advisory bodies from constituting system governance.
Version 1.6.2 (Reproduction)
Closed the Substitution Loophole. Distinguished EXIT (market choice) from FORK (reproduction). Switching
landlords is not forking infrastructure.
Version 1.7 (Stratification)
Closed the Layer Confusion Loophole. Introduced layer-decomposed evaluation requiring each architectural layer
to pass tests independently. Technical decentralization at one layer cannot compensate for governance centralization
at another. Added comprehensive DID-washing analysis.

30

